Our preprocessing code converts UrbanPop datasets into a form that can be read in by ExaEpi and used in simulations. The UrbanPop datasets provide a synthetic population, generated to satisfy constraints from Census data and various other sources. Each person in the dataset is allocated to a geographic location (a Census Block Group), and belongs to a household of a given size. There are many additional fields provided in the dataset, for example, the type of housing, number of vehicles, whether married or not. We use only a few of these fields in the ExaEpi simulations, namely: household identifier, age, sex, race, commute distance, vehicle occupancy, school grade, and NAICS code. Several of these are not currently used in the ExaEpi simulation, but are available for future refinements (sex, race, commute distance, vehicle occupancy). Many of the people in the dataset will have empty values for various fields, for example school grade will be empty for people not at school.

The UrbanPop datasets do not include day/night movement, i.e. the geographic location indicates where a person's home is, and there is no field indicating where they work or go to school. There are some additional datasets available from the UrbanPop team that include day/night information, but these are limited to small metropolitan areas. Consequently, we generate our own movement patterns for the people in our simulation, known as agents. This is carried out once, in a preprocessing step that generates the data that is used for repeated ExaEpi simulations. The preprocessing step generates two additional fields for every agent: a destination or work geographic location if they work or attend school, and a school identifier if they are a student or educator. The preprocessing step produces a file that is used as data input to ExaEpi, and a C++ header file with an agent structure. The latter is generated automatically to ensure that if the field selection changes, ExaEpi will always be built with the correct data structures.

For location assignment, agents are divided into workers, students and unemployed. The workers are those with a non-empty NAICS code in the UrbanPop data. The NAICS (North American Industry Classification System) code classifies business entities by the type of economic activitiy, e.g. construction, retail, manufacturing, etc. The students are those with non-empty grade assignments in the UrbanPop data, and the unemployed are those that are neither students nor workers. All unemployed are assigned a work location that is the same as their home location. An additional complication is that there are people in the UrbanPop data that have both a NAICS code and a grade, i.e. they should be allocated to both workers and students. ExaEpi treats these as two different, non-overlapping populations, so we resolve this issue by classifying all those agents with both NAICS codes and grades as workers if they are over the age of 25, and as students otherwise.

Work locations are assigned using the LODES (LEHD Origin-Destination Employment Statistics). The LODES data are compiled by the US Census Bureau, and contain information about the worker flows from origin geographic locations to destination geographic locations. We use this information to probabilistically assign agents to work locations. For a given home location, there are a set of flows that indicate how many people from that location work at each destination location. We normalize this information to obtain probabilities for destination locations, and use those to randomly allocate agents to work locations. This process ensures that all workers are allocated a work location, and that the distribution preserves the statistical properties of the LODES flows. We confirm this through correlation testing, which typically shows a Pearson correlation coeffient above 0.9 when comparing the generated flows to the LODES flows.

Allocating destination (work) locations to students is more complex. We use the HIFLD educational data, which gives the locations and student and educator populations for most of the schools within the US. The agents are allocated at random to schools until the schools are at capacity or there are no more agents to allocate. This allocation is done in a geographically heirarchical manner, with students being allocated to the closest schools first. So a student will be randomly assigned to a school in the same Census Block Group as their home location first, and if there are no available slots in any of the schools in the same Census Block Group, or there are no schools, then they will be randomly assigned to school in same Census Tract, and, failing that, the same Census Place, all the way up to the County level. This allocation process ensures that students are assigned to schools as close to home as possible, while still maintaining the school population distributions represented by the HIFLD data. A further refinement is that the students are only assigned to schools that match their grade, e.g. grade 4 will only be assigned to schools that include Elementary education. The educational levels include university and college students, and childcare for children too young for school. The agents assigned to childcare usually do not have a grade in the UrbanPop data, and so all agents that are under the age of 5 with an empty grade have some probability of being assigned to childcare. We determine those probabilities from the NCES data, which show how many children of each age are in center-based care, e.g. 32% of those under one. Once students are assigned to schools, they are given a school identifier and a work location associated with that school. The process of student to school allocation gives results statistically very close to the HIFLD data: the Pearson correlation coefficient between the generated data and the schools for the school populations is typically over 0.98.

The final step in preprocessing is to allocate workers to schools as educators. Educators are allocated in a similar manner to the way students are allocated, filling the available educator slots at schools at increasing geographic scales (the HIFLD data provides information on both educator and student populations for all schools). The educators are drawn from the worker population, from specific NAICS codes categories, e.g. 6244 is childcare services, and 6111 is elementary and secondary schools. The educators are assigned a school identifier and the associated geographic location as their work location (overriding any previous assignment from the LODES flows). They are also allocated a grade to indicate which level of school they work at.

The preprocessing step generates data using a given random seed, so multiple realizations of the input data can be obtained by using different random seeds. In practice, the generated data is sufficiently statistically consistent that the ExaEpi simulations do not change significantly between various realizations.





